.TH AF 1 "" "" "Amberfish"

.SH NAME

af \- Amberfish text retrieval software

.SH SYNOPSIS

.B af [-i]
.BI [ options ]
.BI [ file
.IB ... ]
.br
.B af [-s]
.BI [ options ]
.br
.B af [-L]
.BI [ options ]
.br
.B af [-l]
.BI [ options ]
.br
.B af [--fetch]
.BI [ file ]
.BI [ begin ]
.BI [ end ]
.br
.B af [--version]

.SH DESCRIPTION

The program
.B af
is a text-based interface to Amberfish functions for indexing and
searching documents.  A simple indexing example would look something
like:

af -iCv -d mydb *.txt

This creates a new database, mydb, containing an index to the set of
files, *.txt.  To enable faster searching, an optional "linearize"
step can be done (this can take a long time to run):

af -L -d mydb

Here is a typical search command:

af -s -d mydb -Q 'cat & (dog | mouse)'

.SH COMMAND OPTIONS

Only one of these options can be used at a time.

.TP
.B -i, --index
Index documents (either
.I file ...
or specified via standard input if
.B -F
is used).

.TP
.B -s, --search
Search an indexed database.

.TP
.B -L, --linearize
Linearize an indexed database.  Linearizing is an optional step that
can be done after indexing.  The advantages of linearizing are that it
reduces searching time and slightly reduces the size of the index
files.  The disadvantages are that the linearizing process is very
slow, especially when used on large databases, and it prevents any
additional documents from being added to the database.

.TP
.B -l, --list
List the documents contained in a database.

.TP
.B --fetch
Output a portion of a file.  This command takes no other options.  The
file name
.IR file ,
starting offset
.IR begin ,
and ending offset
.I end
are specified at the end of the line.

.TP
.B --version
Print the
.B af
version number.

.SH GENERAL OPTIONS

These options are generally available with all command options.

.TP
.BI "-d, --db " dbname
Use
.I dbname
as the database name.  With some command options such as
.BR -s ,
this option can be supplied multiple times to specify multiple
databases.

.TP
.B -v, --verbose
Show verbose output.  This option can be supplied multiple times to
increase verbosity.

.TP
.B -D, --debug
Show extremely verbose (debugging) output.  Using this option once is
equivalent to
.BR -vvvvv ,
and it can be supplied multiple times to increase verbosity further.

.SH INDEX OPTIONS

The following options can only be used together with the indexing
.RB ( -i )
command.

.TP
.B -C, --create
Create a new database, overwriting any existing one with the same
name.

.TP
.BI "-m, --memory " maximum
Set the maximum amount of memory in megabytes to use for indexing.
More memory speeds up indexing.

.TP
.B --phrase
Enable phrase searching.  This can only be used together with
.BR -C.

.TP
.BI "--split " delimiter
Parse input files into multiple documents at points where the
specified delimiter string is found.

.TP
.B -t, --doctype=text, --doctype=xml, --doctype=erc
Set the document type.  The default is
.BR text .
Specifying
.B xml
enables functions related to searching and retrieving within nested
tags in XML documents.  The
.B erc
doctype is for kernel metadata in Electronic Resource Citation (ERC)
format.

.TP
.BI "--dlevel " level
The maximum resolution (levels of descent) for retrieval of nested
documents.  The default value is 1; increasing it lengthens indexing
time significantly.  Use this for XML instead of
.B --split
to subdivide documents.  Note that this only affects resolution of
elements returned from searches and is unrelated to nested queries
which have much higher (fixed) resolution.

.TP
.B --no-stem
Do not perform stemming.  This can only be used together with
.BR -C.
Normally, stemming is automatically enabled if Amberfish was compiled
with the stemming function.  This option disables stemming even if it
is available.  Note that the stemming function is not distributed with
this package and must be installed manually.

.".TP
.".B --long-words
."Index words longer than the maximum word length.  Using this option
."will cause long words to be truncated to the maximum word length, and
."they can be matched by right-truncated query terms.  By default, such
."words are discarded, i.e. not indexed at all.

.TP
.B -F
Read list of documents to be indexed from standard input, rather than
from the end of the command line.

.SH SEARCH OPTIONS

The following options can only be used together with the searching
.RB ( -s )
command.

.TP
.BI "-Q, --query-boolean " query_string
Search for the specified Boolean query string.

.TP
.BI "-n, --numhits " x
Output a maximum of
.I x
results.

.TP
.BI "--skiphits " x
Do not output the first
.I x
results.

.TP
.B --totalhits
Output the total number of results.

.TP
.B --style=list, --style=lineage, --style=trec
Set style of printed result sets.  The default is
.BR list .
Use the
.B lineage
style with XML to see hierarchical results.  For the
.B trec
style, it is assumed that the indexed file names are the document
numbers and that
.B --skiphits
is not used (because rank always starts at 1).

.TP
.BI "--trec-tag " run_tag
Output TREC results with the specified run tag.  (This is to be used
with
.BR --style=trec .)

.TP
.BI "--trec-topic " topic_number
Output TREC results with the specified topic number.  (This is to be
used with
.BR --style=trec .)

.SH LINEARIZE OPTIONS

The following options can only be used together with the linearize
.RB ( -L )
command.

.TP
.BI "-m, --memory " maximum
Set the maximum amount of memory in megabytes to use for linearizing.
More memory speeds up linearizing.

.TP
.B --no-linear-buffer
Do not use a memory buffer to speed up linearizing.  This option will
be removed once the linearization buffer code proves to be reliable.

.SH AUTHOR

Nassib Nassar; see http://www.etymon.com/ for updates.

Copyright (C) 1999-2004 Etymon Systems, Inc.
