.TH AFOPEN 3 "" "" "Amberfish"

.SH NAME

afopen \- open a database

.SH SYNOPSIS

.B #include "af.h"

.B int afopen(const Afopen *r, Afopen_r *rr);

.SH DESCRIPTION

The
.B afopen
function opens a database so that it can be accessed for searching,
updating, etc.

The argument
.I r
specifies a set of options defined by the following structure:

.nf
typedef struct {
	char *dbpath;
	char *mode;
	int phrase;
	int stem;
} Afopen;
.fi

The
.I dbpath
option specifies the database to be opened, consisting of a path name.
The file names that make up the database are constructed by appending
suffixes to this path name.

The
.I mode
option specifies how the database will be accessed:

.TP
.B r
Open database for reading.  This opens the database files for
searching or other read-only access.

.TP
.B r+
Open database for reading and writing.  This is commonly used to add
to or modify an existing database.

.TP
.B w+
Open database for reading and writing; the database is created if it
does not exist, and otherwise its contents are erased.

.SH RETURN VALUE

This function returns 0 if it exited normally.  If an error occurred,
it returns -1 and
.I aferrno
is set.

If the function exited normally, the structure pointed to by
.I rr
is filled in with the following values:

.nf
typedef struct {
	Uint2 dbid;
} Afopen_r;
.fi

The
.I dbid
value is a database descriptor that can be used to refer to the
database while it remains open.

.SH ERRORS

In addition to the set of "core" errors, this function can return:

.TP
.B AFEDBLOCK
The database is locked.

.TP
.B AFEOPENLIM
Too many open databases.

.TP
.B AFEVERSION
The database was created with an earlier, incompatible version of this
library.
