.TH AFSEARCH 3 "" "" "Amberfish"

.SH NAME

afsearch \- query a set of databases

.SH SYNOPSIS

.B #include "af.h"

.B int afsearch(const Afsearch *r, Afsearch_r *rr);

.SH DESCRIPTION

The
.B afsearch
function searches one or more databases and returns an unordered list
of resultant documents.

The argument
.I r
specifies a set of options defined by the following structure:

.nf
typedef struct {
	Uint2 *dbid;
	int dbidn;
	Afchar *query;
	int qtype;
	int score;
} Afsearch;
.fi

The
.I dbid
option specifies an array of databases to be searched.  The databases
are referred to by their database descriptors, as returned by
.BR afopen (3).

The
.I dbidn
option specifies how many databases are in the array
.IR dbid .

The
.I query
option specifies the query string to be applied in the search.

The
.I qtype
option describes the query type used in
.IR query .
Currently there is only one query type supported:

.TP
.B AFQUERYBOOLEAN
This is the standard Boolean query type.

.PP
The
.I score
option specifies how relevance scores should be calculated:

.TP
.B AFNOSCORE
No score is calculated.  All score values will be set to 0.

.TP
.B AFSCOREDEFAULT
Use the default similarity function.

.SH RETURN VALUE

This function returns 0 if it exited normally.  If an error occurred,
it returns -1 and
.I aferrno
is set.

If the function exited normally, the structure pointed to by
.I rr
is filled in with the following values:

.nf
typedef struct {
	Afresult *result;
	int resultn;
} Afsearch_r;
.fi

The
.I result
value is an array of results, each corresponding to a unique
document that matched the query.

The
.I resultn
value is the number of elements in
.IR result .

Each element of
.I result
is of the following type:

.nf
typedef struct {
	Uint4 docid;
	Uint2 score;
	Uint2 dbid;
} Afresult;
.fi

The
.I docid
is the document identifier.

The
.I score
is the computed relevance score, normally a value in the range, 0 to
10000.

The
.I dbid
is the descriptor of the database containing the document.

Additional processing of results is provided by
.BR afsortscore (3),
.BR afsortdocid (3),
and
.BR afgetresultmd(3).

.SH ERRORS

In addition to the set of "core" errors, this function can return:

.TP
.B AFETERMLEN
A query term exceeded the maximum number of characters allowed.

.TP
.B AFEQUERYNEST
The query was too highly nested.

.TP
.B AFEQUERYSYN
The query contained an error in syntax.
